docs: extend security explanation page to cover SEC0030 V1.3 gaps (#2571)
canonical/operator: docs/explanation/security.md

When producing security documentation for your charm, it's important to consider the security aspects of the charm's dependencies. If there are any security questions that aren't answered here in terms of the use of cryptographic technology, security risks, hardening, and good practice, with regards to Ops, please reach out to the Charm Tech team, and we'll do our best to assist.

## Product architecture

> Ops sits between Juju and your charm code, and its trust boundaries follow from that position. Juju is the trusted control plane: it dispatches hooks, sets the environment variables and hook command results that Ops reads, and owns the machine or Kubernetes container that the charm runs in. Ops is a library running inside the charm process under Juju's control; it parses the data that Juju provides, dispatches events to the charm, and persists a small amount of state on the local filesystem. From the perspective of Ops, your charm code is the least-trusted layer: Ops hands it the event context that Juju supplied and otherwise delegates application logic, secret handling, and workload configuration to the charm. Ops itself opens no network listeners, manages no credentials, and terminates no TLS — those concerns belong to Juju, to the workload, or to the charm author. The Juju-to-Ops boundary is described in the Inter-process communication section, and the state that Ops keeps on the charm side of that boundary is described in the Charm unit databases section.

Reviewer: > The Juju-to-Ops boundary is described in the Inter-process communication section, and the state that Ops keeps on the charm side of that boundary is described in the Charm unit databases section.

Should we link to those sections? Or just drop this sentence?

Reviewer 2: I think it would be fine without this sentence.

> Ops sits between Juju and your charm code, and its trust boundaries follow from that position. Juju is the trusted control plane: it dispatches hooks, sets the environment variables and hook command results that Ops reads, and owns the machine or Kubernetes container that the charm runs in. Ops is a library running inside the charm process under Juju's control; it parses the data that Juju provides, dispatches events to the charm, and persists a small amount of state on the local filesystem. From the perspective of Ops, your charm code is the least-trusted layer: Ops hands it the event context that Juju supplied and otherwise delegates application logic, secret handling, and workload configuration to the charm. Ops itself opens no network listeners, manages no credentials, and terminates no TLS — those concerns belong to Juju, to the workload, or to the charm author. The Juju-to-Ops boundary is described in the Inter-process communication section, and the state that Ops keeps on the charm side of that boundary is described in the Charm unit databases section.

Reviewer: > From the perspective of Ops, your charm code is the least-trusted layer: Ops hands it the event context that Juju supplied and otherwise delegates application logic, secret handling, and workload configuration to the charm.

I have difficulty understanding how the description of what Ops delegates to the charm follows from "your charm code is the least-trusted layer". I'd suggest either expanding on why it's important that Ops  treats charm code as less trusted (and how), or dropping that phrase if it's not so important.

> Ops sits between Juju and your charm code, and its trust boundaries follow from that position. Juju is the trusted control plane: it dispatches hooks, sets the environment variables and hook command results that Ops reads, and owns the machine or Kubernetes container that the charm runs in. Ops is a library running inside the charm process under Juju's control; it parses the data that Juju provides, dispatches events to the charm, and persists a small amount of state on the local filesystem. From the perspective of Ops, your charm code is the least-trusted layer: Ops hands it the event context that Juju supplied and otherwise delegates application logic, secret handling, and workload configuration to the charm. Ops itself opens no network listeners, manages no credentials, and terminates no TLS — those concerns belong to Juju, to the workload, or to the charm author. The Juju-to-Ops boundary is described in the Inter-process communication section, and the state that Ops keeps on the charm side of that boundary is described in the Charm unit databases section.

Reviewer 2: I find this quite dense. How about some adjustments, incorporating suggestions from James:

```suggestion
Ops sits between Juju and your charm code. Its trust boundaries follow from that position. Juju is the trusted control plane: it provides the hook context that Ops reads, and owns the machine or Kubernetes container where the charm runs.

Ops is a library running inside the charm process under Juju's control. It parses the context that Juju provides, dispatches events to the charm, and persists a small amount of state on the local filesystem. The charm is responsible for application logic, secret handling, and workload configuration.

Ops itself opens no network listeners, manages no credentials, and terminates no TLS — those concerns belong to Juju, the workload, or the charm author.
```

> ## Secure by Design

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Secure by design
```

> Ops is designed to keep its security surface small. It adds no daemons or network listeners of its own; the only outbound connection it can make is sending buffered trace data over HTTPS when a charm is integrated with a tracing receiver (see the Cryptographic technology section). It delegates cryptography to Juju and to the Python standard library rather than implementing its own, and it delegates secret storage to Juju secrets. Its persistence is deliberately bounded — a single local state database, plus a local trace buffer when the `tracing` extra is installed — rather than a general-purpose store. As a result, most of a charm's security posture is determined by Juju, by the workload, and by the charm's own code; the Risks and Good practices sections below set out the practical consequences for charm authors.

Reviewer: > see the Cryptographic technology section

Should we link here?

> the Risks and Good practices sections below

And here?

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to mention the other sections. I have a suggestion that proposes a rewrite to avoid them.

> Ops is designed to keep its security surface small. It adds no daemons or network listeners of its own; the only outbound connection it can make is sending buffered trace data over HTTPS when a charm is integrated with a tracing receiver (see the Cryptographic technology section). It delegates cryptography to Juju and to the Python standard library rather than implementing its own, and it delegates secret storage to Juju secrets. Its persistence is deliberately bounded — a single local state database, plus a local trace buffer when the `tracing` extra is installed — rather than a general-purpose store. As a result, most of a charm's security posture is determined by Juju, by the workload, and by the charm's own code; the Risks and Good practices sections below set out the practical consequences for charm authors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ops is designed to keep its security surface small. It adds no daemons or network listeners of its own; the only outbound connection it can make is sending buffered trace data over HTTPS when a charm is integrated with a tracing receiver (see the Cryptographic technology section). It delegates cryptography to Juju and to the Python standard library rather than implementing its own, and it delegates secret storage to Juju secrets. Ops only persists a single local state database, plus a local trace buffer when the `tracing` extra is installed. As a result, most of a charm's security posture is determined by Juju, by the workload, and by the charm's own code; the Risks and Good practices sections below set out the practical consequences for charm authors.
```

Reviewer 2: How about this refactor, building on James's suggestion. I think the text would flow better into the next section this way.

```suggestion
Ops is designed to keep its security surface small.

Ops only persists a single local state database, plus a local trace buffer when the `tracing` extra is installed. As a result, most of a charm's security posture is determined by Juju, by the workload, and by the charm's own code.

Ops adds no daemons or network listeners of its own; the only outbound connection it can make is sending buffered trace data over HTTPS when a charm is integrated with a tracing receiver. It delegates cryptography to Juju and to the Python standard library rather than implementing its own.
```

## Cryptographic technology

The only case where Ops uses cryptography is for sending trace data, when a certificate authority provider has been integrated with the charm. This is done using HTTPS, using either TLS 1.2 or 1.3, using the implementation provided by the standard library of the Python that is executing the charm. See [tracing security](#ops_tracing_security) for more details.

There is no use of hashing or digital signatures.

> The cryptographic functionality is provided entirely by the Python standard library. The tracing support (the `ops[tracing]` extra, packaged as `ops-tracing`) sends trace data using the standard library `ssl` module via `urllib.request`, so the TLS implementation and its cipher suites come from the OpenSSL (or equivalent) library that the running Python interpreter was built against. Ops bundles no separate cryptographic library, and the OpenTelemetry packages that the tracing extra depends on (`opentelemetry-api` and `opentelemetry-sdk`) provide the tracing framework rather than the cryptography.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cryptographic functionality is provided entirely by the Python standard library. The tracing support (the `ops[tracing]` extra, packaged as `ops-tracing`) sends trace data using the standard library `ssl` module via `urllib.request`, so the TLS implementation and its cipher suites come from the OpenSSL (or equivalent) library that the running Python interpreter was built against. Neither Ops nor the OpenTelemetry packages that the tracing extra depends on (`opentelemetry-api` and `opentelemetry-sdk`) provide any other cryptography implementation.
```

Reviewer 2: This is quite dense. How about some adjustments for easier readability (building on James's suggestion):

```suggestion
The cryptographic functionality is provided entirely by the Python standard library. The `ops[tracing]` extra sends data using `urllib.request`, which relies on `ssl` from the standard library, so the TLS implementation and its cipher suites come from the OpenSSL (or equivalent) library that the running Python interpreter was built against. Neither Ops nor the OpenTelemetry packages that the tracing extra depends on (`opentelemetry-api` and `opentelemetry-sdk`) provide any other cryptography implementation.
```

> Ops does not encrypt the state database or buffered trace data at rest. Confidentiality at rest relies on the filesystem permissions documented in the Charm unit databases section and on the host's at-rest encryption story.

Reviewer: > in the Charm unit databases section

Link?

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need the mention.

```suggestion
Ops does not encrypt the state database or buffered trace data at rest. Confidentiality at rest relies on filesystem permissions and the host's at-rest encryption story.
```

When producing security documentation for your charm, it's important to consider the security aspects of the charm's dependencies. If there are any security questions that aren't answered here in terms of the use of cryptographic technology, security risks, hardening, and good practice, with regards to Ops, please reach out to the Charm Tech team, and we'll do our best to assist.

(ops-product-architecture)=
## Product architecture

Ops sits between Juju and your charm code. Its trust boundaries follow from that position. Juju is the trusted control plane: it provides the hook context that Ops reads, and owns the machine or Kubernetes container where the charm runs.

Ops is a library running inside the charm process under Juju's control. It parses the context that Juju provides, dispatches events to the charm, and persists a small amount of state on the local filesystem. The charm is responsible for application logic, secret handling, and workload configuration.

Ops itself opens no network listeners, manages no credentials, and terminates no TLS — those concerns belong to Juju, the workload, or the charm author.

> The diagram below shows where Ops sits and the trust boundaries that follow:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This diagram shows where Ops sits and the trust boundaries that follow:
```

```{mermaid}
flowchart LR

>     Juju["Juju agent<br/>(trusted control plane)"]

Reviewer 2: I think there's no need to repeat

```suggestion
    Juju["Juju agent"]
```

    subgraph Host["Charm host"]
        direction TB
        subgraph Process["Charm process"]
            Ops["Ops library"]
            Charm["Charm code"]
        end

>         State[("State DB +<br/>trace buffer<br/>(JUJU_CHARM_DIR)")]

Reviewer 2: Suggest covering this more obviously below the diagram

```suggestion
        State[("State DB +<br/>trace buffer")]
```

        Workload["Workload"]
    end
    Receiver["Tracing receiver"]

    Juju <-->|"hook env, hook commands"| Ops
    Ops <--> Charm
    Charm -->|manages| Workload
    Ops <--> State
    Ops -..->|"HTTPS, only when integrated"| Receiver
```

> Juju, on one side of the trust boundary, is the trusted control plane that owns the charm host and supplies the hook context Ops reads. The charm host is the unit's machine for a machine charm, or the unit's pod for a Kubernetes charm; in the Kubernetes case the workload runs in a sibling container in the same pod. Inside the charm process, Ops is a library invoked by the charm code; both run as the same unprivileged user and share the same filesystem. The state database and trace buffer live in `JUJU_CHARM_DIR` on that filesystem. The only outbound network connection Ops can make on its own is sending buffered trace data over HTTPS, and only when the charm is integrated with a tracing receiver.

Reviewer 2: This seems to repeat info from elsewhere. How about something like this:

```suggestion
More detail:

* The charm host is the unit's machine for a machine charm, or the unit's pod for a Kubernetes charm. In the Kubernetes case, the workload runs in a sidecar container in the same pod.
* Inside the charm process, Ops is a library invoked by the charm code. Both run as the same unprivileged user and share the same filesystem.
* The state database and trace buffer live in `JUJU_CHARM_DIR` on that filesystem.
```

When testing an event with [](ops.testing.Context), the mocked unit state database and tracing data are stored in memory. Each event creates a new charm directory, which is provided by [](tempfile.TemporaryDirectory).

## Logging and monitoring

> Charms log through the Python standard library `logging` module. Ops installs a handler that forwards log records to Juju by running the `juju-log` hook command, so charm and framework log messages are collected and surfaced by Juju (for example, through `juju debug-log`) using Juju's own log levels and storage. Ops also emits structured security events that follow the [OWASP security-logging vocabulary](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Logging_Vocabulary_Cheat_Sheet.html), forwarded to Juju through the same `juju-log` channel. These cover framework-level events such as uncaught exceptions in charm code and hook command authorisation failures. As a good practice, never write sensitive data to logs (see the Good practices section).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Charms use the Python standard library `logging` module. Ops installs a handler that forwards log records to Juju by running the `juju-log` hook command, so charm and framework log messages are collected and surfaced by Juju (for example, through `juju debug-log`) using Juju's own log levels and storage. Ops also emits structured security events that follow the [OWASP security-logging vocabulary](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Logging_Vocabulary_Cheat_Sheet.html), forwarded to Juju through the same `juju-log` channel. These cover framework-level events such as uncaught exceptions in charm code and hook command authorisation failures. As a good practice, never write sensitive data to logs (see the Good practices section).
```

> As a good practice, never write sensitive data to logs (see the Good practices section).

Link? Or remove this sentence or reword? e.g. "Never write sensitive data to logs."

Reviewer 2: I think it's fine to remove. Some additional suggestions for readability:

```suggestion
Charms use the Python standard library `logging` module. Ops installs a handler that forwards log records to Juju by running the `juju-log` hook command, so charm and framework log messages are collected and surfaced by Juju. For example, through `juju debug-log`, using Juju's own log levels and storage.

Ops also emits structured security events that follow the [OWASP security-logging vocabulary](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Logging_Vocabulary_Cheat_Sheet.html), forwarded to Juju through the same `juju-log` channel. These cover framework-level events such as uncaught exceptions in charm code and hook command authorisation failures. As a good practice, never write sensitive data to logs.
```

Author: What about this?

```suggestion
Charms use the Python standard library {py:mod}`logging` module. Ops installs a handler that forwards log records to Juju by running the juju-log hook command. Anything the charm writes to stdout or stderr is also captured by Juju. Charm and framework log messages are surfaced by Juju, for example, through juju debug-log, using Juju's own log levels and storage.

Ops also emits structured security events that follow the [OWASP security-logging vocabulary](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Logging_Vocabulary_Cheat_Sheet.html), forwarded to Juju through the same juju-log channel. These cover framework-level events such as uncaught exceptions in charm code and hook command authorisation failures. As a good practice, never write sensitive data to logs.
```

Reviewer 2: Looks good. Adding some backticks (which will especially be needed for `stdout` and `stderr` to pass the spelling check)

```suggestion
Charms use the Python standard library {py:mod}`logging` module. Ops installs a handler that forwards log records to Juju by running the `juju-log` hook command. Anything the charm writes to `stdout` or `stderr` is also captured by Juju. Charm and framework log messages are surfaced by Juju, for example, through `juju debug-log`, using Juju's own log levels and storage.

Ops also emits structured security events that follow the [OWASP security-logging vocabulary](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Logging_Vocabulary_Cheat_Sheet.html), forwarded to Juju through the same `juju-log` channel. These cover framework-level events such as uncaught exceptions in charm code and hook command authorisation failures. As a good practice, never write sensitive data to logs.
```

> ## Secure decommissioning

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Decommissioning
```

Author: I was trying to fit closer to the SSDLC and Product Security Documentation docs, but looking at them again, the section heading doesn't have to be exactly the same.

Ops is a library that runs inside the charm process, so it has no separate lifecycle to decommission. Everything Ops persists lives in the charm directory (`JUJU_CHARM_DIR`): the state database (`.unit-state.db`) and, when the `tracing` extra is installed, the trace buffer (`.tracing-data.db`). Removing the unit through Juju removes the charm directory and so removes Ops's data along with the charm.

If a unit is taken out of service by some means other than `juju remove-unit` (for example, reclaiming the underlying machine or container directly), treat the charm directory the same as any other location that may hold sensitive data, because `StoredState` and buffered deferred-event payloads can contain workload data passed in through events.

> ## Security updates

Reviewer 2: In Jubilant we have a combined [Security lifecycle](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/jubilant/explanation/security/#security-lifecycle) section, which I prefer the structure of. But I'm OK if you want to keep separate sections for updates and lifecycle here.

Another nice thing about the Jubilant one is that it explicitly says that Jubilant uses semantic versioning.

Author: Semver mention is definitely good. I'll tweak the rest, it probably fits the SSDLC layout better anyway.

For information about supported versions and how to report security issues, see [SECURITY.md](https://github.com/canonical/operator/blob/main/SECURITY.md).

> ### Security lifecycle

Reviewer 2: Top-level section would be fine I think

```suggestion
## Security lifecycle
```

> Ops is distributed as the `ops` package on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/ops/), and security updates are delivered as new releases there; charms pick them up by re-locking and rebuilding, as described above. In line with [SECURITY.md](https://github.com/canonical/operator/blob/main/SECURITY.md), security updates are released for all major versions that have had a release in the last year, and a major version that has had no release for over a year is considered end of life. Long Term Support (LTS) releases receive 5 years of support and up to 10 additional years of [extended support](https://ubuntu.com/security/esm). See the [tool versions page](#tool-versions) for current release dates and end-of-life dates for each supported version. To check which version is installed, run `pip show ops` or `python -c 'import ops; print(ops.__version__)'`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ops is distributed as the `ops` package on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/ops/), and security updates are delivered as new releases there. Charms receive updates by re-locking and rebuilding. In line with [SECURITY.md](https://github.com/canonical/operator/blob/main/SECURITY.md), security updates are released for all major versions that have had a release in the last year. A major version that has had no release for over a year is considered end of life. Long Term Support (LTS) releases receive 5 years of support and up to 10 additional years of [extended support](https://ubuntu.com/security/esm). See the [tool versions page](#tool-versions) for current release dates and end-of-life dates for each supported version. To check which version is installed, run `pip show ops` or `python -c 'import ops; print(ops.__version__)'`.
```

Reviewer 2: Suggest breaking into paragraphs (or refactor to be more like Jubilant):

```suggestion
Ops is distributed as the `ops` package on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/ops/), and security updates are delivered as new releases there. Charms receive updates by re-locking and rebuilding. In line with [SECURITY.md](https://github.com/canonical/operator/blob/main/SECURITY.md), security updates are released for all major versions that have had a release in the last year. A major version that has had no release for over a year is considered end of life. Long Term Support (LTS) releases receive 5 years of support and up to 10 additional years of [extended support](https://ubuntu.com/security/esm).

See the [tool versions page](#tool-versions) for current release dates and end-of-life dates for each supported version. To check which version is installed, run `pip show ops` or `python -c 'import ops; print(ops.__version__)'`.
```

As a good practice, never write sensitive data to logs (see the Good practices section).

#### Security event schema

Each structured security event is a JSON object with the following fields:

| Field | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `datetime` | UTC timestamp in ISO 8601 format. Duplicates Juju's own timestamp so the event is self-contained when ingested separately. |
| `type` | Always `"security"`, so consumers can filter security events from other structured records. |
| `level` | OWASP severity: `INFO`, `WARN`, or `CRITICAL`. Not the same as the Juju or Python log level. |
| `appid` | `"<model-uuid>-<unit-name>"`, identifying the unit that produced the event. |
| `event` | `"<event_type>:<event_data>"`, where `event_type` is from the OWASP vocabulary (see below). |
| `description` | Free-form human-readable description with details that do not fit in `event`. |

#### Security events emitted by Ops

> The following framework-level events are emitted at the OWASP levels shown. They cover the SSDLC stage-1 categories that Ops, as a library, is in a position to detect; access, authentication, and user-management events are the responsibility of Juju and the workload.

Reviewer 2: I think the intro could be simplified, as the title is already informative. Something like:

```suggestion
The following events cover the SSDLC stage-1 categories that Ops can detect. Access, authentication, and user-management events are the responsibility of Juju and the workload.
```

| OWASP event | Level | When Ops emits it | SSDLC category |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `sys_crash` | `WARN` | An uncaught exception escapes the charm code. | System Crash |
| `sys_restart` | `WARN` | The charm calls [](ops.Unit.reboot) to reboot the underlying machine. | System Restart |
| `sys_monitor_disabled` | `WARN` | A Pebble check is stopped through [](ops.Container.stop_checks). | System Monitoring Disabled |
| `authz_fail` | `CRITICAL` | A non-leader unit tries to get or set the application status, or a Juju hook command fails with an authorisation-related error. | Unauthorized Access Attempt |

#### Configuring and opting out

> Ops itself has no log-stream toggle and no separate monitoring agent: all logging goes through Juju. Verbosity is controlled in Juju, not in Ops or the charm:

Reviewer 2: "Toggle" might not always be understood. How about:

```suggestion
Ops has no built-in logging configuration and no separate monitoring agent: all logging goes through Juju. Verbosity is controlled in Juju, not in Ops or the charm:
```

If a unit is taken out of service by some means other than `juju remove-unit` (for example, reclaiming the underlying machine or container directly), treat the charm directory the same as any other location that may hold sensitive data, because `StoredState` and buffered deferred-event payloads can contain workload data passed in through events.

## Security lifecycle

Ops is distributed as the `ops` package on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/ops/) and follows semantic versioning. Security updates are delivered as new releases on PyPI; charms pick them up by re-locking and rebuilding.

(ops-supported-versions)=
### Supported versions

In line with [SECURITY.md](https://github.com/canonical/operator/blob/main/SECURITY.md), security updates are released for all major versions that have had a release in the last year. A major version that has had no release for over a year is considered end of life. Long Term Support (LTS) releases receive 5 years of support and up to 10 additional years of [extended support](https://ubuntu.com/security/esm).

> See the [tool versions page](#tool-versions) for current release dates and end-of-life dates for each supported version. To check which version is installed, run `pip show ops` or `python -c 'import ops; print(ops.__version__)'`.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean run this in the charm source to see which version is installed? Or run this in the deployed charm unit somehow?

*Edit:* Maybe we could link to "Verifying an update was applied"? Or put that info here and link back to it from there?

### Receiving updates

Because Ops is a library, it is updated as part of the charm's normal dependency-management workflow rather than through an in-product auto-update mechanism. The charm author controls when a new version is picked up; the Juju user picks it up by refreshing the charm.

> We strongly recommend restricting the version of `ops` (and `ops[harness,testing,tracing]` in your `dev` dependencies) in `pyproject.toml` in a way that allows picking up new compatible releases every time that you re-lock. If your charm needs to support Ubuntu 20.04 (with Python 3.8), then this looks like `ops~=2.23`, which is a Long Term Support (LTS) release. Otherwise, this looks like `ops~=3.0`. Set a minor version that includes all the features that the charm uses.

Reviewer 2: I feel this recommendation is liable to get lost if the reader jumps to a subsection. I recommend pulling this into its own section at the same level as "Receiving updates":

- Supported versions
- <mark>Restricting the version</mark>
- Receiving updates

#### Manually applying an update

To apply a security update by hand:

> 1. Re-lock dependencies (for example, `uv lock --upgrade-package ops` or `poetry update ops`) to pick up the latest `ops` release that satisfies the version constraint.

Reviewer 2: I think this would be easier to read as a separate sentence

```suggestion
Re-lock dependencies to pick up the latest `ops` release that satisfies the version constraint. For example, `uv lock --upgrade-package ops` or `poetry update ops`.
```

2. Rebuild the charm with `charmcraft pack`.
3. Refresh deployed units with `juju refresh <app> --path ./<charm>.charm` (or by uploading the new revision to Charmhub).

#### Scheduling updates

Configure the charm repository so that dependency updates are detected and proposed automatically — for example, with [Dependabot](https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/dependabot/dependabot-security-updates/about-dependabot-security-updates) or [Renovate](https://www.mend.io/renovate/). Combined with a release pipeline, this gives a regular cadence of rebuilt charm revisions with the latest patched `ops`.

#### Postponing updates and the associated risk

> Pinning `ops` to an exact version, or disabling automated dependency proposals, postpones updates indefinitely. This means published security fixes for `ops` will not reach your deployed charms until the pin is lifted, the charm is rebuilt, and the unit is refreshed — potentially leaving units exposed to known issues for the entire delay. If you pin for stability or reproducibility reasons, plan a regular cadence to review the pin against the [supported versions](#ops-supported-versions) and the project's release notes.

Reviewer 2: Link to the GitHub release notes?

#### Verifying an update was applied

To check which version of `ops` is running in a deployed unit:

```text
juju ssh <unit> "JUJU_CHARM_DIR=$(ls -d /var/lib/juju/agents/unit-*/charm | head -1); \
    \$JUJU_CHARM_DIR/venv/bin/python -c 'import ops; print(ops.__version__)'"
```

> Or, in any environment where the charm's virtualenv is on `PATH`, run `pip show ops` or `python -c 'import ops; print(ops.__version__)'` and compare the result to the version on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/ops/).

Reviewer 2: Better to use the full term? Then we also wouldn't need a spelling exception

```suggestion
Or, in any environment where the charm's virtual environment is on `PATH`, run `pip show ops` or `python -c 'import ops; print(ops.__version__)'` and compare the result to the version on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/ops/).
```

Author: I wondered about this too, but thought virtualenv was the generally accepted term (from [these days](https://pypi.org/project/virtualenv/)), but the Python docs use "venv" and "virtual environment" more, so full probably is best.

## Reporting vulnerabilities

> If you believe you have found a security vulnerability in `ops`, please report it privately following the instructions in the [`SECURITY.md`](https://github.com/canonical/operator/blob/main/SECURITY.md) file in the project repository.

Reviewer 2: I think Ops would be better than `ops` when we're not talking about the package specifically.

Reports are handled according to the [Ubuntu Security disclosure and embargo policy](https://ubuntu.com/security/disclosure-policy), which describes how researchers, users, and customers can responsibly disclose issues to Canonical.

Information about known vulnerabilities affecting `ops` is published in:

* the [GitHub Security Advisories for `canonical/operator`](https://github.com/canonical/operator/security/advisories);
* the [release notes for `ops`](https://github.com/canonical/operator/releases) on GitHub;

> * relevant [Ubuntu Security Notices](https://ubuntu.com/security/notices) when a vulnerability also affects an Ubuntu-packaged copy of the library.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The [GitHub Security Advisories for `canonical/operator`](https://github.com/canonical/operator/security/advisories).
* The [Ops release notes](https://github.com/canonical/operator/releases) on GitHub.
* Relevant [Ubuntu Security Notices](https://ubuntu.com/security/notices) when a vulnerability also affects an Ubuntu-packaged copy of the library.
```

## Risks

The risks below follow from the trust boundaries described in [](#ops-product-architecture) and the design choices in [](#ops-secure-by-design); the mitigations are summarised in [](#ops-good-practices).

> Ops inherits the risks of Juju executing charms (for example, injecting data into the charm context or through the use of hook commands). Because Juju is the trusted control plane in [](#ops-product-architecture), any compromise of the Juju side propagates into the charm process where Ops runs. Charm authors should be familiar with {external+juju:ref}`Juju security <juju-security>` and {external+pebble:ref}` Pebble security <security>`.

Reviewer 2: The second sentence reads a bit strangely. How about:

```suggestion
Ops inherits the risks of Juju executing charms (for example, injecting data into the charm context or through the use of hook commands). Any compromise of Juju propagates into the charm process where Ops runs. Charm authors should be familiar with [](#ops-product-architecture), {external+juju:ref}`Juju security <juju-security>`, and {external+pebble:ref}` Pebble security <security>`.
```

> If a charm is integrated with a tracing receiver, Ops introduces the risk of outgoing traces being intercepted — this is the only outbound network connection Ops makes (see [](#ops-product-architecture)). Traces should not include any sensitive data, but intercepted traces can provide information about the structure of the charm and the events that the charm has processed. In addition, an attacker that blocked trace data could hide malicious activity. Mitigation: integrate a certificate authority provider so traces are sent over HTTPS, as noted in [](#ops-good-practices).

Reviewer 2: I'd drop the reference as we've just linked there, and there's not much additional to learn there beyond what we write here.

```suggestion
If a charm is integrated with a tracing receiver, Ops introduces the risk of outgoing traces being intercepted — this is the only outbound network connection Ops makes. Traces should not include any sensitive data, but intercepted traces can provide information about the structure of the charm and the events that the charm has processed. In addition, an attacker that blocked trace data could hide malicious activity. Mitigation: integrate a certificate authority provider so traces are sent over HTTPS, as noted in [](#ops-good-practices).
```

> Otherwise, Ops doesn't introduce any new security risks. Ops does expand the impact of the Juju risk of an attacker gaining access to the filesystem of the charm — the state database and trace buffer described in [](#ops-charm-unit-databases) are not encrypted at rest (see [](#ops-cryptographic-technology) for the at-rest guidance):

Reviewer 2: Having the "see Cryptographic technology" reference at this point was hard to understand. How about putting it immediately after the bullets instead.
